3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has rapidly emerged as one of the transformative methods for high-fidelity 3D scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis. This provides a highly effective and better alternative to the previous implicit neural representation, like NeRF \cite{cite1, cite2, cite8}. Unlike the NeRF, which relies on multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) and highly computationally expensive volume rendering, the 3DGS utilizes explicit scene representation using millions of tiny 3D Gaussian Ellipsoids \cite{cite1, cite2}. Each of the Gaussian Primitives is parameterized by some of its key parameters: 3D centre position, covariance (which defines anisotropic shape and scale within the 3D space), opacity, and color information, which is represented by the spherical harmonics \cite{cite1, cite9, cite10}.

The reconstruction pipeline generally initializes the Gaussian Primitives using a sparse point cloud, which is generated via Structure-from-Motion (SfM) \cite{cite1, cite10}. During the optimization phase, 3DGS projects these Gaussians onto a 2D plane using highly parallelized, tile-based rasterizers (Rasterizer is a component in the graphics pipeline that converts 3D scenes data (such as points, polygons, or primitives) into 2D pixels on the screen for rendering an image). These projected 2D Gaussians are depth-sorted and combined together using alpha blending to synthesize the final image. The network then adjusts the Gaussian parameters to reduce the photometric loss between the rendered output and the ground-truth images by controlling density via splitting, cloning, or pruning Gaussians. This explicit formulation overrides the empty space calculations, enabling exceptionally faster training and real-time rendering (exceeding 100 frames per second) \cite{cite1, cite2}.

In the field of applied 3D reconstruction, 3DGS has showcased versatile performance across various domains. For the large-scale urban modeling, the researchers address the GPU memory constraint by dividing the scenes into smaller chunks/regions, which allows them to process every sub-region in parallel \cite{cite8}. Additionally, 3DGS has also improved in True Digital Orthophoto Maps (TDOMs) generation by replacing perspective camera models with orthogonal projections, which directly produce distortion-free mapping results. To address geometric degradation in sparse-view scenarios, such as the UAV flight boundaries, some frameworks use common learning methods like few-shot learning (FSGS) and molecular depth supervision to better constrain and preserve the scene geometry. Additionally, specialized variants for satellite remote sensing, such as SatGS and EOGS++, utilize appearance adaptive adjustments and camera refinement to better handle seasonal change, temporary objects, and shadows \cite{cite5, cite9}.

---------
Reference

[1] Wang, X., Xu, Y., Zhang, W., Wang, X., & Zhan, Z. (2025). HyGS-TDOM: A Hybrid Gaussian Splatting Famework for generating TDOMs from both dense and sparse views. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, 48, 139-146.
[2] Yang, J., Cai, Z., Wang, T., Ye, T., Gao, H., & Huang, H. (2025). Ortho-3DGS: true digital orthophoto generation from unmanned aerial vehicle imagery using the depth-regulated 3D Gaussian splatting. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing.
[5] Bai, N., Yang, A., Chen, H., & Du, C. (2025). SatGS: Remote sensing novel view synthesis using Multi-temporal satellite images with appearance-adaptive 3DGS. Remote Sensing, 17(9), 1609.
[8] Wang, T., Wang, X., Hou, Y., Xu, Y., Zhang, W., & Zhan, Z. (2025). PG-SAG: Parallel Gaussian splatting for fine-grained large-scale urban buildings reconstruction via semantic-aware grouping. PFG–Journal of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Geoinformation Science, 93(5), 483-498.
[9] Bournez, P., Aira, L. S., Ehret, T., & Facciolo, G. (2025). EOGS++: Earth Observation Gaussian Splatting with Internal Camera Refinement and Direct Panchromatic Rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16542.
[10] Xu, H., Ma, L., Guan, H., & Li, J. (2025, August). Large-Scale Urban Scene Reconstruction Using 3D Gaussian Splatting and Satellite Imagery. In IGARSS 2025-2025 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (pp. 6766-6769). IEEE.