Neural Radiation Fields (NeRF) are amongst the most prominent techniques that utilise continuous implicit neural representations for 3D scene reconstruction rather than explicit geometries like meshes and point clouds. This technique has outperformed others in the creation of photorealistic 3D models from 2D images by encoding complex scene geometry and appearance directly into the neural network's weights [1]. At the core, NeRF utilises a fully connected deep network, typically a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), to encode these scenes into network weights [2].

The reconstruction process models the scene as a continuous 5D function. The MLP takes a 5D coordinate as input—comprising a 3D spatial location (x,y,z) and a 2D viewing direction (θ,ϕ) — and outputs the volume density and view-dependent emitted radiance (RGB colour) at that specific spatial point. The NeRF's framework works with a differentiable volume rendering pipeline as its core. This works by casting the rays into the scene and sampling spatial points. The system combines the radiance and opacity using alpha compositing. This enables the network to learn a highly accurate 3D representation from a set of 2D images by reducing the discrepancy between rendered and ground-truth views [3]. The network is optimised end-to-end by minimising the photometric loss between the rendered synthetic images and the actual ground-truth multi-view training images [4].

In the domain of 3D urban reconstruction, NeRF models demonstrate strong capabilities for constructing 3D geometry from appearance, such as reflections and translucency, which traditionally confuse standard Structure-from-Motion (SfM) photogrammetry. Consequently, NeRF has been effectively adopted for digitization of cultural heritage for complex artifacts [3]. Furthermore, NeRF's use has also been proven helpful in large-scale urban modelling and remote sensing [5]. Advanced frameworks like Ortho-NeRF generate a True Digital Orthophoto Map (TDOM) by the utilization of orthogonal ray sampling instead of central projection. This overrides the problems of geometric distortions and jagged edges [2, 6]. Similarly, the S-NeRF (Neural Radiation Fields for Street View) models the ambient sky lighting and illumination to reconstruct precise topography even in the case of changing shadow conditions [4,5].

Despite having many remarkable successes, the standard NeRF model faces significant limitations. The model relies on a number of MLP evaluations per ray, which introduces a computational bottleneck. This results in intensive training cycles - often hours or even days - and the rendering speed is far too low for real-time applications [3, 6]. Additionally, NeRF requires dense multi-view supervision and also struggles with overfitting when provided with sparse observational data, which is considered to be a common issue in aerial photogrammetry [7].

---------
Reference

[1] Wang, X., Xu, Y., Zhang, W., Wang, X., & Zhan, Z. (2025). HyGS-TDOM: A Hybrid Gaussian Splatting Famework for generating TDOMs from both dense and sparse views. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, 48, 139-146.
[2] Yang, J., Cai, Z., Wang, T., Ye, T., Gao, H., & Huang, H. (2025). Ortho-3DGS: true digital orthophoto generation from unmanned aerial vehicle imagery using the depth-regulated 3D Gaussian splatting. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing.
[3] Callahan, C. M. (2024). Neural Radiance Fields for the Digitization of Ethnographic Collections: A Comparative Analysis of State-of-the-Art and Established Methods for the 3D Documentation of Cultural Heritage Objects.
[4] Derksen, D., & Izzo, D. (2021). Shadow neural radiance fields for multi-view satellite photogrammetry. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 1152-1161).
[5] Bai, N., Yang, A., Chen, H., & Du, C. (2025). SatGS: Remote sensing novel view synthesis using Multi-temporal satellite images with appearance-adaptive 3DGS. Remote Sensing, 17(9), 1609.
[6] Chen, S., Yan, Q., Qu, Y., Gao, W., Yang, J., & Deng, F. (2025). Ortho-NeRF: generating a true digital orthophoto map using the neural radiance field from unmanned aerial vehicle images. Geo-spatial Information Science, 28(2), 741-760.
[7] Gao, Z., Li, L., Liu, X., Jiao, L., Liu, F., & Yang, S. (2024). Uncertainty guided progressive few-shot learning perception for aerial view synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 27, 1177-1192.